Shawn Corey Carter (born December 4, 1969),[6] known professionally as Jay-Z,[a] is 
an American rapper, songwriter, producer, entrepreneur, and record 
executive.[9][10] He is considered among the best rappers of all 
time.[11][12][13][14]

Born and raised in New York City, Jay-Z first began his musical career after 
founding the record label Roc-A-Fella Records in 1995, and subsequently released 
his debut studio album Reasonable Doubt in 1996. The album was released to 
widespread critical success, and solidified his standing in the music industry. He 
has gone onto release twelve additional albums, which have all attained generally 
positive critical reception and universal commercial success, with The Blueprint 
(2001) and The Black Album (2003) albums later being heralded as modern musical 
classics.[15][16] He has also released the full-length collaborative albums Watch 
the Throne (2011) and Everything Is Love (2018) with Kanye West and wife Beyoncé, 
respectively.[17]

Outside of his musical career, Jay-Z has also attained significant success and 
media attention for his career as a businessman. In 1999, he founded the clothing 
retailer Rocawear,[18] and in 2003, he founded the luxury sports bar chain 40/40 
Club. Both businesses have grown to become multi-million dollar corporations, and 
allowed Jay-Z to fund the start-up for the entertainment company Roc Nation, which 
was founded in 2008. In 2015, he acquired the tech company Aspiro, and took charge 
of their media streaming service Tidal, which has since become the world's 
third-largest online streaming company.[19] His marriage to musician Beyoncé has 
also been a source of substantial media attention.[20]

Jay-Z is among the most critically acclaimed musicians and one of the best-selling 
music artists of all time, with over 100 million records sold worldwide.[21] He has 
won a total of 22 Grammy Awards, the most by a rapper, and holds the record for the 
most number-one albums by a solo artist on the Billboard 200, with 13.[22] He has 
been ranked by Billboard and fellow music publication Rolling Stone as one of the 
100 greatest artists of all time.[23][24] In 2017, he became the first rapper to be 
honored into the Songwriters Hall of Fame,[25] and in 2018, received the 
commemorative "Salute to Industry Icons" award at the 60th Grammy Awards.[26]